Improved Non-Equi Join Explanation in data.table (#6813)
Rdatatable/data.table: vignettes/datatable-joins.Rmd

                     nomatch = NULL]
```

### 4.1 Handling Column Name Behavior in Non-Equi Joins

> When performing non-equi joins (<, >, <=, >=), column names are assigned as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When performing non-equi joins (`<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=`), column names are assigned as follows:
```

- The left operand (`x` column) determines the column name in the result.
- The right operand (`i` column) contributes values but does not retain its original name.
- By default, `data.table` does not retain the `i` column used in the join condition unless explicitly requested.

In non-equi joins, the left side of the operator (e.g., x_int in x_int >= i_int) must be a column from x, while the right side (e.g., i_int) must be a column from i. Non-equi joins do not support arbitrary expressions.

> For example, on = .(x_int >= i_int) is valid, but on = .(x_int >= i_int + 1) is not valid.

Reviewer 2: use backticks `` `on = .(x_int >= i_int)` `` etc

> In non-equi joins, the left side of the operator (e.g., x_int in x_int >= i_int) must be a column from x, while the right side (e.g., i_int) must be a column from i. Non-equi joins do not support arbitrary expressions.
> For example, on = .(x_int >= i_int) is valid, but on = .(x_int >= i_int + 1) is not valid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In non-equi joins, the left side of the operator (e.g., `x_int` in `x_int >= i_int`) must be a column from `x`, while the right side (e.g., `i_int`) must be a column from `i`. Non-equi joins do not support arbitrary expressions.
For example, `on = .(x_int >= i_int)` is valid, but `on = .(x_int >= i_int + 1)` is not valid.

We plan to allow arbitrary expressions eventually, see [#1639](https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/issues/1639).
```

> ```{r}

Reviewer: please provide a useful name for all vignette chunks

````
```{r <name>}
...
```
````

Author: @MichaelChirico i did all the suggested changes can you confirm it 
thanks .

x <- data.table(x_int = 2:4, lower = letters[1:3])
i <- data.table(i_int = c(2, 4, 5), UPPER = LETTERS[1:3])
x[i, on = .(x_int >= i_int)]
```
Key Takeaways:

> - The name of the output column (x_int) comes from x, but the values come from i_int in i.
> - The last row contains NA because no rows in x match the last row in i (UPPER = "C").
> - Multiple rows in x are returned to match the first row in i with UPPER = "A".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The name of the output column (`x_int`) comes from `x`, but the values come from `i_int` in `i`.
- The last row contains `NA` because no rows in `x` match the last row in `i` (`UPPER == "C"`).
- Multiple rows in `x` are returned to match the first row in `i` with `UPPER == "A"`.
```

If you want to keep the i_int column from i, you need to explicitly select it in the result:

```{r}
x[i, on = .(x_int >= i_int), .(i_int = i.i_int, x_int = x.x_int, lower, UPPER)]
```
This ensures the output clearly distinguishes i_int (from i) and x_int (from x).

> If you want to exclude unmatched rows, you should use nomatch = NULL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to exclude unmatched rows (an _inner join_), you should use nomatch = NULL:
```

                     nomatch = NULL]
```

### 4.1 Handling Column Name Behavior in Non-Equi Joins

When performing non-equi joins (<, >, <=, >=), column names are assigned as follows:

- The left operand (`x` column) determines the column name in the result.
- The right operand (`i` column) contributes values but does not retain its original name.
- By default, `data.table` does not retain the `i` column used in the join condition unless explicitly requested.

In non-equi joins, the left side of the operator (e.g., x_int in x_int >= i_int) must be a column from x, while the right side (e.g., i_int) must be a column from i. Non-equi joins do not support arbitrary expressions.
For example, on = .(x_int >= i_int) is valid, but on = .(x_int >= i_int + 1) is not valid.

> If you need to apply transformations, create a temporary column first.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this sentence, can you please clarify or delete?

Author: In non-equi joins using binary operators (<, >, <=, >=):
-Only column names are allowed on either side of the binary operator, not expressions.
-The left side must be a column name from the outer table (x), and the right side must be a column name from 
 the inner table (i).
-The resulting column will have the name from the left side (x) but contain values from the right side (i) where 
 the join condition is met.

For example:
x[i, on = .(x_int >= i_int)]
is valid, where x_int is a column in x and i_int is a column in i.

x[i, on = .(x_int >= i_int + 1)]
is not valid, because it includes a calculation (i_int + 1).

If you need to apply transformations or use complex expressions in a join condition,you need to  create temporary columns with the desired calculations before performing the join. For example:

# Instead of this (which is not valid):
DT[X, on = .(y <= foo, y + 2 >= foo)]

DT[, y_plus_2 := y + 2][
  X, on = .(y <= foo, y_plus_2 >= foo)
]
This approach allows for more complex join criteria while adhering to the syntax rules of non-equi joins in data.table.

Author: done 👍

```{r}
x <- data.table(x_int = 2:4, lower = letters[1:3])
i <- data.table(i_int = c(2, 4, 5), UPPER = LETTERS[1:3])
x[i, on = .(x_int >= i_int)]
```
Key Takeaways:
- The name of the output column (x_int) comes from x, but the values come from i_int in i.
- The last row contains NA because no rows in x match the last row in i (UPPER = "C").
- Multiple rows in x are returned to match the first row in i with UPPER = "A".

> If you want to keep the i_int column from i, you need to explicitly select it in the result:

Reviewer 2: if you want the output to include columns that are consistent with the input column names and values, you need to ...

```{r}

> x[i, on = .(x_int >= i_int), .(i_int, x_int, lower, UPPER)]

Reviewer 2: I get this result
```r
> x[i, on = .(x_int >= i_int), .(i_int, x_int, lower, UPPER)]
   i_int x_int  lower  UPPER
   <int> <int> <char> <char>
1:     2     2      a      A
2:     2     2      b      A
3:     2     2      c      A
4:     4     4      c      B
5:     5     5   <NA>      C
```
which may be confusing because the values in i_int column are same as x_int column of output.
I suggest changing to below which has both values:
```r
> x[i, on = .(x_int >= i_int), .(i_int=i.i_int, x_int=x.x_int, lower, UPPER)]
   i_int x_int  lower  UPPER
   <int> <int> <char> <char>
1:     2     2      a      A
2:     2     3      b      A
3:     2     4      c      A
4:     4     4      c      B
5:     5    NA   <NA>      C
```
what do you think?

Author: Yes, I agree that explicitly distinguishing i_int from x_int using i.i_int and x.x_int makes the output clearer, 
i_int = i.i_int clearly states that i_int comes from i.
x_int = x.x_int ensures x_int values are from x.

                     nomatch = NULL]
```

### 4.1 Handling Column Name Behavior in Non-Equi Joins

When performing non-equi joins (`<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=`), column names are assigned as follows:

- The left operand (`x` column) determines the column name in the result.
- The right operand (`i` column) contributes values but does not retain its original name.
- By default, `data.table` does not retain the `i` column used in the join condition unless explicitly requested.

In non-equi joins, the left side of the operator (e.g., `x_int` in `x_int >= i_int`) must be a column from `x`, while the right side (e.g., `i_int`) must be a column from `i`. Non-equi joins do not support arbitrary expressions.
For example, `on = .(x_int >= i_int)` is valid, but `on = .(x_int >= i_int + 1)` is not valid.

We plan to allow arbitrary expressions eventually, see [#1639](https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/issues/1639).

```{r non_equi_join_example}
x <- data.table(x_int = 2:4, lower = letters[1:3])
i <- data.table(i_int = c(2, 4, 5), UPPER = LETTERS[1:3])
x[i, on = .(x_int >= i_int)]

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```

````

Key Takeaways:
- The name of the output column (`x_int`) comes from `x`, but the values come from `i_int` in `i`.
- The last row contains `NA` because no rows in `x` match the last row in `i` (`UPPER == "C"`).
- Multiple rows in `x` are returned to match the first row in `i` with `UPPER == "A"`.

> If you want to keep the i_int column from i, you need to explicitly select it in the result:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to keep the `i_int` column from `i`, you need to explicitly select it in the result:
```

```{r retain_i_column}
x[i, on = .(x_int >= i_int), .(i_int = i.i_int, x_int = x.x_int, lower, UPPER)]

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```

````

> This ensures the output clearly distinguishes i_int (from i) and x_int (from x).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ensures the output clearly distinguishes `i_int` (from `i`) and `x_int` (from `x`).
```

> If you want to exclude unmatched rows (an _inner join_), you should use nomatch = NULL:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to exclude unmatched rows (an _inner join_), you should use `nomatch = NULL`:
```

                     nomatch = NULL]
```

### 4.1 Output column names in non-equi joins

When performing non-equi joins (`<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=`), column names are assigned as follows:

- The left operand (`x` column) determines the column name in the result.
- The right operand (`i` column) contributes values but does not retain its original name.
- By default, `data.table` does not retain the `i` column used in the join condition unless explicitly requested.

In non-equi joins, the left side of the operator (e.g., `x_int` in `x_int >= i_int`) must be a column from `x`, while the right side (e.g., `i_int`) must be a column from `i`.

> Non-equi joins do not currently support arbitrary expressions (but see [#1639](https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/issues/1639)). For example, `on = .(x_int >= i_int)` is valid, but `on = .(x_int >= i_int + 1)` is not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Non-equi joins do not currently support arbitrary expressions (but see [#1639](https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/issues/1639)). For example, `on = .(x_int >= i_int)` is valid, but `on = .(x_int >= i_int + 1L)` is not. To perform such a non-equi join, first add the expression as a new column, e.g. `i[, i_int_plus_one := i_int + 1L]`, then do `.on(x_int >= i_int_plus_one)`.
```

> Non-equi joins do not currently support arbitrary expressions (but see [#1639](https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/issues/1639)). For example, `on = .(x_int >= i_int)` is valid, but `on = .(x_int >= i_int + 1)` is not valid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Non-equi joins do not currently support arbitrary expressions (but see [#1639](https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/issues/1639)). For example, `on = .(x_int >= i_int)` is valid, but `on = .(x_int >= i_int + 1)` is not.
```

```{r non_equi_join_example}
x <- data.table(x_int = 2:4, lower = letters[1:3])
i <- data.table(i_int = c(2L, 4L, 5L), UPPER = LETTERS[1:3])
x[i, on = .(x_int >= i_int)]
```

Key Takeaways:
- The name of the output column (`x_int`) comes from `x`, but the values come from `i_int` in `i`.
- The last row contains `NA` because no rows in `x` match the last row in `i` (`UPPER == "C"`).
- Multiple rows in `x` are returned to match the first row in `i` with `UPPER == "A"`.

If you want to keep the `i_int` column from `i`, you need to explicitly select it in the result:

```{r retain_i_column}
x[i, on = .(x_int >= i_int), .(i_int = i.i_int, x_int = x.x_int, lower, UPPER)]
```

This ensures the output clearly distinguishes `i_int` (from `i`) and `x_int` (from `x`).

> If you want to exclude unmatched rows (an _inner join_), you should use `nomatch = NULL`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to exclude unmatched rows (an _inner join_), use `nomatch = NULL`:
```

                     nomatch = NULL]
```

> ### 4.1 Handling Column Name Behavior in Non-Equi Joins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### 4.1 Output column names in non-equi joins
```

When performing non-equi joins (`<`, `>`, `<=`, `>=`), column names are assigned as follows:

- The left operand (`x` column) determines the column name in the result.
- The right operand (`i` column) contributes values but does not retain its original name.
- By default, `data.table` does not retain the `i` column used in the join condition unless explicitly requested.

> In non-equi joins, the left side of the operator (e.g., `x_int` in `x_int >= i_int`) must be a column from `x`, while the right side (e.g., `i_int`) must be a column from `i`. Non-equi joins do not support arbitrary expressions.
> For example, `on = .(x_int >= i_int)` is valid, but `on = .(x_int >= i_int + 1)` is not valid.
> 
> We plan to allow arbitrary expressions eventually, see [#1639](https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/issues/1639).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In non-equi joins, the left side of the operator (e.g., `x_int` in `x_int >= i_int`) must be a column from `x`, while the right side (e.g., `i_int`) must be a column from `i`.

Non-equi joins do not currently support arbitrary expressions (but see [#1639](https://github.com/Rdatatable/data.table/issues/1639)). For example, `on = .(x_int >= i_int)` is valid, but `on = .(x_int >= i_int + 1)` is not valid.
```

                     nomatch = NULL]
```

### 4.1 Handling Column Name Behavior in Non-Equi Joins

> When performing non-equi joins (<, >, <=, >=), it's important to understand how column names are assigned in the result.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When performing non-equi joins (<, >, <=, >=), column names are assigned as follows.

```

                     nomatch = NULL]
```

### 4.1 Handling Column Name Behavior in Non-Equi Joins

When performing non-equi joins (<, >, <=, >=), it's important to understand how column names are assigned in the result.

- The left operand (`x` column) determines the column name in the result.
- The right operand (`i` column) contributes values but does not retain its original name.
- By default, `data.table` does not retain the `i` column used in the join condition unless explicitly requested.

> `In non-equi joins, the resulting column inherits the name from the left (x) table but contains values from the right (i) table.`

Reviewer 2: delete this line?

> This can cause confusion when `x` and `i` have different column names.
> 
> **Important**: Non-equi join conditions must use column names from `x` and `i`, *not arbitrary expressions*.  
> For example, `on = .(x_col >= i_col)` is valid, but `on = .(x_col >= i_col + 1)` is not.  
> 
> In non-equi joins, the left side of the operator (e.g., `A` in `A >= B`) *must be a column from `x`*,  
> and the right side (e.g., `B`) *must be a column from `i`*.
> 
> To use expressions, create temporary columns first (see example below).
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In non-equi joins, the left side of the operator (e.g., `A` in `A >= B`) must be a column from `x`,  
and the right side (e.g., `B`) must be a column from `i`.  Non-equi join does not support  arbitrary expressions. For example, `on = .(x_col >= i_col)` is valid, but `on = .(x_col >= i_col + 1)` is not.  

Arbitrary comparisons can be accomplished by create temporary columns first. For example:
```

```{r}
x <- data.table(A = 1:5, value_x = letters[1:5])
i <- data.table(B = c(2, 4, 5), value_i = LETTERS[1:3])
x[i, on = .(A >= B)]
```
In data.table, when using a non-equi join condition (>=, <, etc.), the column from x is retained in the result, while the column from i is not retained unless explicitly selected.

> Expected Output

Reviewer 2: use triple backticks

Reviewer 2: I did not get the same output as below.
```r
> x <- data.table(A = 1:5, value_x = letters[1:5])
> i <- data.table(B = c(2, 4, 5), value_i = LETTERS[1:3])
> x[i, on = .(A >= B)]
       A value_x value_i
   <int>  <char>  <char>
1:     2       b       A
2:     2       c       A
3:     2       d       A
4:     2       e       A
5:     4       d       B
6:     4       e       B
7:     5       e       C
```
please remove the "expected output" because anyway the actual output will be shown when rendered

also I think the example could either be simplified or made realistic.
For a fake data example like currently, it should be as simple as possible, so as easy to understand as possible.
How about changing to the example below?
```r
> x <- data.table(x_int = 2:4, lower = letters[1:3])
> i <- data.table(i_int = c(2, 4, 5), UPPER = LETTERS[1:3])
> x[i, on = .(x_int >= i_int)]
   x_int  lower  UPPER
   <int> <char> <char>
1:     2      a      A
2:     2      b      A
3:     2      c      A
4:     4      c      B
5:     5   <NA>      C
```
I believe this is simpler, so easier for the user to understand.
You can mention that 
* the name of the output column `x_int` comes from `x` but the values come from `i$i_int`
* the last row with NA means that no rows in `x` match the last row in `i` with `UPPER="C"`
* multiple rows in `x` are returned to match the first row in `i` with `UPPER="A"`

   A    value_x  value_i
1: 2       b       A
2: 4       d       B
3: 5       e       C

> 4: 5       e       C

Reviewer 3: I'd move this part above to ~L580 and combine with L174-L179.

If multiple rows in x satisfy the join condition with a single row in i, those rows will be duplicated in the result.

> Notice that A appears in the result, but B from i is missing.
> **Note for SQL Users**: Unlike SQL, `data.table` non-equi joins:  
> - Do not retain the `i` column used in the join condition unless explicitly selected.  
> - Use the `x` column name in the result (e.g., `A` instead of `B` in `A >= B`).
> 
> This is because B was only used for filtering and is not retained unless explicitly selected.
> However, columns from i that are not used in the join condition (e.g., value_i) are automatically included in the output by default, since data.table keeps all non-matching columns from i.
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
I think this is sufficiently covered in the rest of what you've written.

> `If you want to keep the B column from i, you need to explicitly select it in the result:`

Reviewer 2: single backticks is not appropriate here (only use for code)

```{r}
x[i, on = .(A >= B), .(B, A, value_x, value_i)]
```
Updated Output
   B  A   value_x  value_i
1: 2  2       b       A
2: 4  4       d       B
3: 5  5       e       C
4: 5  5       e       C

> Now, B from i is explicitly retained in the final table.
> 
> `important Consideration: nomatch = NULL in Non-Equi Joins`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
